people have been using media to talk
about sex for a long time love letters
phone sex racy Polaroids there's even a
story of a girl who eloped with a man
that she met over the Telegraph in 1886
today we have sexting and I am effecting
expert not an expert flexor though I do
know what this means I think you do too
I have been studying sexting since the
media attention to it began in 2008 I
wrote a book on the moral panic about
sexting and here's what I found most
people are worrying about the wrong
thing they're trying to just prevent
sexting from happening entirely but let
me ask you this as long as it's
completely consensual what's the problem
with sexting people are into all sorts
of things that you may not be into like
blue cheese or cilantro
next thing is certainly risky like
anything that's fun but as long as you
are not sending an image to someone who
doesn't want to receive it there's no
harm what I do think is a serious
problem is when people share private
images of others without their
permission and instead of worrying about
sexting what I think we need to do is
think a lot more about digital privacy
the key is consent right now most people
are thinking about sexting without
really thinking about consent at all did
you know that we currently criminalize
teen sexting it can be a crime because
it counts as child pornography if
there's an image of someone under 18 and
it doesn't even matter if they took that
image open self and shared it willingly
so we end up with this bizarre legal
situation where two seventeen year olds
can legally have sex in most US states
but they can't photograph it some states
have also tried passing sexting
misdemeanor laws but these laws repeat
the same problem because they still make
consensual sexting illegal it doesn't
make sense to try to ban all sexting to
try to address privacy violations this
is kind of like saying let's solve the
problem of date rape by just making
dating completely illegal most teams
don't get arrested for sexting but can
you guess who does it's often teens who
are disliked by their partner's parents
and this can be because of class bias
racism or homophobia most prosecutors
are of course smart enough not to use
child pornography charges against
teenagers but some do according to
researchers at the University of New
Hampshire 7% of all child pornography
possession arrests are teams sexting
consensually with other teams
child pornography is a serious crime but
it's just not the same thing as teen
sexting parents and educators are also
responding to sexting without really
thinking too much about consent their
message to teens is often just don't do
it and I totally get it
there are serious legal risks and of
course that potential for privacy
violations and when you are a teen I'm
sure you did exactly as you were told
right you're probably thinking my kid
would never sex and that's true your
little angel may not be sexting because
only 33 percent of 16 and 17-year olds
are sexting but sorry by the time
they're older
odds are they will be sexting every
study I've seen puts the rate above 50%
for 18 to 24 year-olds
and most of the time nothing goes wrong
people ask me all the time things like
isn't sexting just so dangerous though
it's like like you wouldn't leave your
wallet on a park bench and you know you
expect it's going to get stolen if you
do that right here's how I think about
it sexting is like leaving your wallet
at your boyfriend's house if you come
back the next day and all the money is
just gone you really need to dump that
guy
so instead of criminalizing expecting to
try to prevent these privacy violations
instead you need to make consent central
to how we think about that circulation
of our private information every new
media technology raises privacy concerns
in fact in the u.s. the very first major
debates about privacy were in response
to technologies that were relatively new
at the time in the late 1800s people
were worried about cameras which were
just suddenly more portable than ever
before and newspaper gossip columns they
were worried that the camera would
capture information about them take it
out of context and widely disseminate it
the sound familiar it's exactly what
we're worrying about now with social
media and drone cameras and of course
sexting and these fears about technology
they make sense because technologies can
amplify and bring out our worst
qualities and behaviors but there are
solutions and we've been here before
with a dangerous new technology in 1908
Ford introduced the Model T car traffic
fatality rates were rising the serious
problem it looks so safe right our first
response was to try to change drivers
behavior so we developed speed limits
and enforced them through fines but over
the following decades we started to
realize the technology of the car itself
is not just neutral we could design the
car to make it safer so in the 1920s
we got shatter resistant windshields in
the 1950s seatbelts and in the 1990s
airbags all three of these areas lost
individuals and industry came together
over time to help solve the problems
with a new technology causes and we can
do the same thing with digital privacy
of course it comes back to consent
here's the idea before anyone can just
your private information they should
have to get your permission
this idea of affirmative consent comes
from anti-rape activists who tell us
that we need consent for every sexual
act and we have really high standards
for consent in a lot of other areas
think about having surgery your doctor
has to make sure that you are
meaningfully and knowingly consenting to
that medical procedure this is not the
type of consent with like an iTunes
Terms of Service where you just scroll
the bottom and you're like agree agree
whatever if we think more about consent
we can have better privacy laws right
now we just don't have that many
protections if your ex-husband or your
ex-wife is a terrible person they can
take your nude photos and upload them to
a porn site it can be really hard to get
those images taken down and in a lot of
space you're actually better off if you
took my images of yourself because then
you can file a copyright claim
right now if someone violates your
privacy whether that's an individual or
a company or the NSA you can try filing
a lawsuit but you may not be successful
because many courts assume that digital
privacy is just impossible so they're
not willing to punish anyone for
violating it I still hear people asking
me all the time isn't a digital image
somehow blurring the line between public
and private because it's digital right
no no everything digital is not just
automatically public that doesn't make
any sense as NYU legal scholar how am
you so mom tells us we have laws and
policies and norms that protect all
kinds of information that's private and
it doesn't make a difference if it's
digital or not all of your health
records are digitized but your doctor
can't just share them with anyone all of
your financial information is held in
digital databases but your credit card
company can't just post your purchase
history online
better laws could help address privacy
violations after they happen but one of
the easiest things we can all do is make
personal changes to help protect each
other's privacy we're always told that
privacy is our own sole individual
responsibility we're told constantly
monitor and update your privacy settings
we're told never share anything you
wouldn't want the entire world to see
this doesn't make sense
digital media are social environments
and we share things with people we trust
all day every day as Princeton
researcher Jennifer Tessie argues our
data and our privacy they're not just
personal they're actually interpersonal
and so one thing you can do that's
really easy is just start asking for
permission before you share anyone
else's information if you want to post a
photo of someone online ask for
permission if you want to forward an
email thread ask for permission and if
you want to share someone's nude selfie
obviously ask for permission these
individual changes can really help us
protect each other's privacy but we need
technology companies on board as well
these companies have very little
incentive to help protect our privacy
because their business models depend on
us sharing everything with as many
people as possible right now if I send
you an image you can forward that to
anyone that you want but what if I got
to decide if that image was forwardable
or not this would tell you you don't
have my permission to send this image
out we do this kind of thing all the
time to protect copyrights
if you buy an e-book you can't just send
it out to as many people as you want so
why not try this with mobile phones what
you can do is we can demand that tech
companies add these protections to our
devices and our platforms as the default
after all you can choose the color of
your car but the air bags are always
standard
if we don't think more about digital
privacy and consent there can be serious
consequences
there was a teenager from Ohio let's
call her Jennifer for the sake of her
privacy she shared nude photos of
herself with her highschool boyfriend
thinking she could trust him
unfortunately he betrayed her and sent
her photos around the entire school
Jennifer was embarrassed and humiliated
but instead of being compassionate her
classmates harassed her they called her
a [ __ ] and a [ __ ] and they made her
life miserable
Jennifer started missing school and her
Drake grades dropped ultimately Jennifer
decided to end her own life Jennifer did
nothing wrong all she did was share a
nude photo with someone she thought that
she could trust and yet our laws tell
her that she committed a horrible crime
equivalent to child pornography our
gender norms tell her that by producing
this nude image of herself she somehow
did the most horrible shameful thing and
when we assume that privacy is
impossible in digital media
we completely write-off and excuse her
boyfriends pad bad behavior people are
still saying all the time to victims of
privacy violations what were you
thinking you should have never sent that
image if you're trying to figure out
what to say
instead try bit imagine you run into
your friends
who broke their legs skiing they took a
risk to do something fun and it didn't
end well but you're probably not going
to be the jerk who says well I guess you
shouldn't have gone skiing men if we
think more about consent we can see that
victims of privacy violations deserve
our compassion not criminalization
shaming harassment or punishment we can
support victims and we can prevent some
privacy violations by making these legal
individual and technological changes
because the problem is not sexing the
issue is digital privacy and one
solution is consent so the next time a
victim of a privacy violation comes up
to you instead of blaming them let's do
this instead let's shift our ideas about
digital privacy and let's respond with
compassion thank you
[Applause]